docs: add observability page (#2384)
edgelesssys/constellation: docs/docs/architecture/observability.md

# Observability

> Observability in Kubernetes is the process of gaining insight into the behavior and performance of applications running on Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observability in Kubernetes is the ability to gain insight into the behavior and performance of applications running on Kubernetes.
```
nit: observability is not a process. (Observation might be a process.)

> Observability in Kubernetes is the process of gaining insight into the behavior and performance of applications running on Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, observability is the ability to gain insight into the behavior and performance of applications.
```
Can we omit one "Kubernetes"? Is this clear enough?

It helps identify and resolve issues more effectively, ensuring stability and performance of Kubernetes workloads, reducing downtime and outages, and improving efficiency.
The "three pillars of observability" are logs, metrics, and traces.

> In the context of Confidential Computing, observability is a delicate subject and needs to be applied so that it doesn't leak any sensitive information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of Confidential Computing, observability is a delicate subject and needs to be applied such that it doesn't leak any sensitive information.
```

> The following gives an overview of where and how standard observability tools can be applied in Constellation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following gives an overview of where and how you can apply standard observability tools in Constellation.
```
nit: prefer active voice

## Cloud resource monitoring

While inaccessible, Constellation's nodes are still visible as black box VMs to the hypervisor.
Resource consumption, such as memory and CPU utilization, can be monitored from the outside and observed via the cloud platforms directly.
Similarly, other resources, such as storage and network and their respective metrics, are visible via the cloud platform.

## Metrics

Metrics are numeric representations of data measured over intervals of time. They're essential for understanding system health and gaining insights using telemetry signals.

> By default, Constellation exposes the [metrics for Kubernetes systems components](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-metrics/) inside the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Constellation exposes the [metrics for Kubernetes system components](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-metrics/) inside the cluster.
```

Similarly, the [etcd metrics](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/metrics/) endpoints are exposed inside the cluster.

> These metrics endpoints can be [disabled](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-metrics/#disabling-metrics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These [metrics endpoints can be disabled](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-metrics/#disabling-metrics).
```
nit: links should be descriptive

> You can collect these cluster-internal metrics via tools such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) or [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can collect these cluster-internal metrics via tools such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) or the [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).
```

I think [Elastic](https://www.elastic.co/elastic-stack) refers to it as << the Elastic Stack >>

> Cilium supports [metrics via Prometheus endpoints](https://docs.cilium.io/en/latest/observability/metrics/) as well.

Reviewer 2: We should probably explain or leave a link to a page that explains how Constellation is related to Cilium.

However, in Constellation, they're disabled by default and must be enabled first.

## Logs

Logs represent discrete events that usually describe what's happening with your service.
The payload is an actual message emitted from your system along with a metadata section containing a timestamp, labels, and tracking identifiers.

### System logs

> Constellation utilizes cloud logging for events occurring during the early stages of a node's boot process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constellation uses cloud logging for events occurring during the early stages of a node's boot process.
```
nit: [MS style guide](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/word-choice/use-simple-words-concise-sentences) doesn't like this word

> These logs include [Bootstrapper](./microservices.md#bootstrapper) events and [disk UUIDs](../architecture/images.md#state-disk) for discovery.

Reviewer: what do you mean by *discovery*?

You can access the cloud logging [directly via the cloud provider endpoints](../workflows/troubleshooting.md#cloud-logging).

More detailed system-level logs are accessible via `/var/log` and [journald](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-journald.service.html) on the nodes directly.

> They can be collected from there, for example, via [filebeat and logstash](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/filebeat/current/logstash-output.html), tools of the [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They can be collected from there, for example, via [Filebeat and Logstash](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/filebeat/current/logstash-output.html), tools of the [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).
```

> They can be collected from there, for example, via [Filebeat and Logstash](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/filebeat/current/logstash-output.html), tools of the [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They can be collected from there, for example, via [Filebeat and Logstash](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/filebeat/current/logstash-output.html), which are tools of the [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).
```

Otherwise it sounds like a listing of 2 different tools.

> In case of an error during the creation or initialization, the CLI automatically collects the [Bootstrapper](./microservices.md#bootstrapper) logs and returns these as a file for [troubleshooting](../workflows/troubleshooting.md). Here is an example of such an event:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of an error during the initialization, the CLI automatically collects the [Bootstrapper](./microservices.md#bootstrapper) logs and returns these as a file for [troubleshooting](../workflows/troubleshooting.md). Here is an example of such an event:
```
we have that only for init

> ```sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell-session
```

Cluster initialization failed. This error is not recoverable.
Terminate your cluster and try again.
Fetched bootstrapper logs are stored in "constellation-cluster.log"
```

### Kubernetes logs

Constellation supports the [Kubernetes logging architecture](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/logging/).
By default, logs are written to the nodes' encrypted state disks.
These include the Pod and container logs and the [system component logs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/logging/#system-component-logs).

> [Constellation services](https://docs.edgeless.systems/constellation/architecture/microservices) run as pods inside the `kube-system` namespace and use the standard container logging mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Constellation services](microservices.md) run as Pods inside the `kube-system` namespace and use the standard container logging mechanism.
```

> The same is true for the [Cilium Pods](https://docs.cilium.io/en/latest/operations/troubleshooting/#logs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The same applies for the [Cilium Pods](https://docs.cilium.io/en/latest/operations/troubleshooting/#logs).
```
nit: sounds better to me

> You can collect logs from within the cluster via tools such as [Fluentd](https://github.com/fluent/fluentd), [Loki](https://github.com/grafana/loki), or [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can collect logs from within the cluster via tools such as [Fluentd](https://github.com/fluent/fluentd), [Loki](https://github.com/grafana/loki), or the [Elastic Stack](https://www.elastic.co/de/elastic-stack/).
```

## Traces

> Modern systems are implemented as interconnected complex and distributed microservices. Understanding request flows and system communications is a huge technical challenge, mainly because all systems in a chain need to be modified to propagate tracing information. Distributed tracing is a new approach to increasing observability and understanding performance bottlenecks. A trace represents consecutive events that reflect an end-to-end request path in a distributed system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modern systems are implemented as interconnected complex and distributed microservices. Understanding request flows and system communications is challenging, mainly because all systems in a chain need to be modified to propagate tracing information. Distributed tracing is a new approach to increasing observability and understanding performance bottlenecks. A trace represents consecutive events that reflect an end-to-end request path in a distributed system.
```

> Constellation supports [traces for Kubernetes systems components](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-traces/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constellation supports [traces for Kubernetes system components](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-traces/).
```
